Specify Base Profile (#12)
qir-alliance/qir-spec: specification/under_development/Compilation_And_Targeting.md

Compilation stages
- Language specific compilation: Compilation of source code to QIR bitcode
- General optimizations: Optimizations that map QIR -> QIR and that do not limit compatibility in any way
- General linking: Combines bitcode from different sources and libraries according to [standard linking practices]()
- QIS resolution: Links a library (bitcode) taking naming conventions into account and giving strict precedence to the definitions in that library over definitions in the source code, unless otherwise indicated by a function attribute, and resolves precision if needed.
- Targeting and profile/qis specific optimization: maps QIR -> QIR profile
- Profile Validation: checks whether the compiled code is compliant with the specified profile and fails compilation otherwise
- Backend specific compilation and optimization, resolution of runtime functions (possibly object level linking, standard LTO), possibly machine code generation

TODO: "Automatic weak attribute" for `__quantum__qis__` functions?  
-> probably better to just require that `__quantum__qis__` function either are declaration only, or are weak definitions. 

> -> Or allow for front end specific names with an attribute marking the compiled name that follows naming convention?

Reviewer: I think we actually want `linkonce` since that allows uncalled definitions to be discarded. But this depends on whether or not we want to maintain uncalled definitions such that later optimizations or rewrite steps can utilize qis functions that are not used by the program itself.

# Compilation Process and Toolchain

> QIR serves as an integrating layer on top of which a shared compilation stage is built to connect a variety of front- and backends. To accelerate progress, quantum programming frameworks often choose to expose tools and APIs to facilitate reseach and development efforts across the entire stack rather than just at the application level. Efforts to develop and evaluate the performance of different error correction schemes, for example, illustrate that compilation logic may initially be expressed as application code before it is automated and integrated into the compiler toolchain. 

Reviewer 2: Probably worth defining somewhere what is meant by "frontend" and "backend" as these are critical terms that are used a lot.

Author: Agreed, but also always hard to do. My current plan is to a) link to a wiki page that describes compiler front-, middle, and backends, which seems accurate enough to apply, and b) add a diagram with a caption somewhere to maybe visualize the compilation stages and add a sentence or two there. I'll omit services from the mix - that would like just add confusion otherwise.

Author: I added the links and added a todo for the diagram. I'll close this thread for now, but please comment if you feel it is not sufficiently addressed.

A high degree of flexibility and configurability is hence of great importance when conceptualizing different compilation stages and how front- and backends integrate with the QIR toolchain and ecosystem.
At the same time, a clear understanding of the purpose and functionality of subsequent stages in the compilation process is absolutely vital to grow a robust and performant compiler infrastructure over time.

In addition to the [design goals of QIR](https://github.com/qir-alliance/qir-spec/blob/main/Scope.md) itself, we hence define the following goals for the compiler infrastructure around it:

- Unify the ecosystem when reasonable; <br/>
  Certain design choices can easily and often unintentionally lead to a fragmentation of the ecosystem of quantum application, libraries, and compilation tools, making it harder to leverage existing work in a new context. For example, requiring application code to be expressed in terms of a backend specific set of quantum instructions impedes portability of that code and hampers the development of shared application libraries.

> - Allow to make use of backend specific instructions at the application level; <br /> 

Author: fixed.

>   Exposing access to backend specific instructions is a valuable tool for research purposes. While we encourage libraries to be built against a hardware agnostic default set of instructions ([Default QIS]()), we aim for a simple mechanism for deviating from that default for the purpose of experimenting with new hardware intrinsics and developing backend specific compiler optimizations. These development in turn inform what abstractions are beneficial to expose in the Default QIS, and permit to ultimately incorporate fruitful optimizations into a target specific compilation stage.

Author: fixed.

  
- Define (and follow clear) guideance for defining backend specific instruction sets; <br />
  ...

TODO: the same as what is mentioned under bullet 1 applies to profiles

## Compilation Stages

- Language specific compilation: Compilation of source code to QIR bitcode
- General optimizations: Optimizations that map QIR -> QIR and that do not limit compatibility in any way

> - General linking: Combines bitcode from different sources and libraries according to [standard linking practices]()

Reviewer 3: Link missing? I suppose you mean like  [LLVM link](https://llvm.org/docs/CommandGuide/llvm-link.html)

Author: updated.

> - QIS resolution: Links a library (bitcode) taking naming conventions into account and giving strict precedence to the definitions in that library over definitions in the source code, unless otherwise indicated by a function attribute, and resolves precision if needed.

Reviewer 3: I do not understand this. Is this to be understood as that there is a "library" which has the effect that if I link against it and there is duplicate symbols, the library takes precedence and the symbol in my code is deleted, or how is this to be understood?

Author: I need to flesh out the description - these are more or just my notes for now. I need to process one doc after another. Let's first close on Base_Profile.md and then proceed to the next document.

> - Targeting and profile/qis specific optimization: maps QIR -> QIR profile

Author: I'll tackle this when updating/fleshing out this file in general. Let's first close on Base_Profile.md.

> - Profile Validation: checks whether the compiled code is compliant with the specified profile and fails compilation otherwise

Reviewer 2: Where and how is the "specified profile" specified? Is this something that has to be embedded in the QIR somehow?

Author: I think that would be good, yes.

Author: As discussed, the profile id is attached to an entry point as an attribute, while the spec version is captured in module flags.

However, to enable research scenarios it needs to be possible, for example, to easily prototype simulation specific optimizations that rely on direct access to the quantum state, and leverage them to accelerate the simulation of quantum subroutines defined in a library without modifying the source code of that libary. 

This can be achieve by a custom compiler pass (QIR -> QIR) that takes a config file of IR function names and the qis name as arguments and retroactively adds this attribute. Note that this config file is frontend specific. 

What we gain by adding a linking stage with some customizations, compared to just use the standard llvm linker:

- It is still possible to have a simulator (or hardware for that matter) that implements several gate sets but use a specific gate set, i.e. only a subset of the implemented gates, during execution.
- It avoids forcing different front ends to effectively align on naming convention at the IR level.
- It permits to check signatures and fail at compile time if they don't match.

### Targeting

> The QIR specification defines which instructions, including runtime functions and QIS functions, are sufficient to support arbitrary computations that make use of both quantum and classical resources, and gives recommendations for how to leverage and combine these building blocks in a way that ensures maximal compatibility with different backends. Most or possibly all backends today do not support arbitrary computations. A common requirement for a program to be executable on a quantum backend is, for example, that it is possible to ensure during compilation that the quantum computation terminates. Such requirements poses fundamental limitations for which programs can or cannot be executed on a specific backend. Compiling a program in a way that maximizes compatibility with different backends means that the program representation facilitates that further compilation steps can largely eliminate constructs that are not supported by the backend. This targeting process to meet backend requirements compiles QIR into a QIR profile. It may result in a compilation failure if certain constructs are not supported by the backend and cannot reasonably be eliminated/replaced as part of targeting. For example, suppose the targeted backend requires measurements to be performed only as a final instruction on a QPU, i.e. all quantum resources are released after measurement. If the program contains branching based on measurements, i.e. subsequent quantum computations depend on a prior measurement result, then this construct (meaning the branching) can be eliminate by replacing it with a coherent version according to the [Deferred Measurement Principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deferred_Measurement_Principle). However, this may be impractical since it may require a (potentially significantly) larger number of qubits to perform the computation, such that the targeting stage may choose to fail compilation instead.

Author: Thanks for the call out - GitHub was less than helpful here. I made that change.

> The QIR specification outlines how to ensure that certain data structures, control flow structures, and classical computations can be eliminated during targeting. It is up to each front end to determine the implications for when source code can be successfully compiled and executed and whether or not to give early feedback during development. 

Reviewer 4: This seems an important step for front end language designers to want to harness QIR in a portable manner. But are front end language designers discouraged from writing compilers that can compile straight to base profile (or future extended profiles) themselves?

Author: I think that is a question that may also be worthwhile touching on in the meeting tomorrow.

library.

This can be achieve by a custom compiler pass (QIR -> QIR) that takes a config
file of IR function names and the qis name as arguments and retroactively adds
this attribute. Note that this config file is frontend specific.

What we gain by adding a linking stage with some customizations, compared to
just use the standard llvm linker:

- It is still possible to have a simulator (or hardware for that matter) that
  implements several gate sets but use a specific gate set, i.e. only a subset
  of the implemented gates, during execution.
- It avoids forcing different front ends to effectively align on naming
  convention at the IR level.
- It permits to check signatures and fail at compile time if they don't match.

### Targeting

The QIR specification defines which instructions, including runtime functions
and QIS functions, are sufficient to support arbitrary computations that make
use of both quantum and classical resources, and gives recommendations for how
to leverage and combine these building blocks in a way that ensures maximal
compatibility with different backends. Most or possibly all backends today do

> not support arbitrary computations. A common requirement for a program to be
> executable on a quantum backend is, for example, that it is possible to ensure
> during compilation that the quantum computation terminates. Such requirements

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
not support arbitrary computations. For example, a common requirement for a program to be
executable on a quantum backend is the ability to ensure
during compilation that the quantum computation terminates. Such requirements
```
